Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
energy metabolism and biochemistry. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Why does energy metabolism matter to the anaesthetist,
and what is the central currency of cellular energy?
Energy metabolism is the set of biochemical processes by which the body extracts
energy from fuels and uses it to power all cellular work,
and it matters to the anaesthetist because so much of what we manage depends upon
it — oxygen delivery and consumption, the production of carbon dioxide and heat,
the response to starvation and stress, the handling of glucose and lactate,
and a group of dangerous metabolic emergencies.
The central currency of cellular energy is adenosine triphosphate,
universally abbreviated to ATP.
Energy released from the oxidation of fuels is not used directly;
instead it is captured in the high-energy phosphate bonds of ATP,
which then acts as the immediate, common energy carrier for virtually every
energy-requiring process in the cell — muscle contraction,
active transport such as the sodium–potassium pump, synthesis of molecules,
and nerve conduction.
ATP is continually consumed and regenerated, with a very high turnover:
a person at rest synthesises and breaks down their own body weight of ATP each day,
because only a small amount is stored at any moment.
Hydrolysis of ATP to adenosine diphosphate releases the energy that drives cellular
work, and the role of metabolism is to regenerate ATP from this diphosphate as fast
as it is used.
So energy metabolism is the extraction of energy from fuels to regenerate ATP,
the universal energy currency whose hydrolysis powers cellular work,
and it matters to us through oxygen consumption,
carbon dioxide and heat production,
fuel handling and the metabolic emergencies we encounter.
Tell me more about ATP and the way energy is handled in the cell.
Adenosine triphosphate is a nucleotide consisting of the base adenine,
the sugar ribose, and a chain of three phosphate groups,
and it is the chemical link between the reactions that release energy and those
that require it.
The energy is held in the bonds linking the phosphate groups,
particularly the terminal one; when this bond is hydrolysed,
splitting ATP into adenosine diphosphate and inorganic phosphate,
a substantial amount of usable free energy is released to drive coupled cellular
reactions.
The system works because ATP sits at an intermediate energy level:
it can be readily formed by the energy-releasing oxidation of fuels and readily
broken down to power energy-requiring processes,
acting as a rechargeable carrier shuttling between the two.
Because the cell holds only a small quantity of ATP,
sufficient for a few seconds of demand, it must be regenerated continuously,
and the rate of regeneration must match the rate of use precisely.
There are short-term back-up stores of high-energy phosphate,
notably creatine phosphate in muscle,
which can rapidly rephosphorylate adenosine diphosphate to ATP for a brief burst of
activity before the main metabolic pathways take over.
The cell's overall energy state is sensed and regulates metabolism,
with a low energy charge stimulating energy production.
So ATP is a rechargeable nucleotide carrier whose terminal phosphate bond holds
usable energy, regenerated continuously to match demand,
buffered briefly by creatine phosphate,
and its level reflects and regulates the cell's energy state.
What are the body's fuel sources, and how are they stored?
The body derives its energy from three classes of fuel — carbohydrate,
fat and protein — which differ in their energy content,
their storage and the readiness with which they are used,
and understanding their hierarchy explains the body's responses to feeding,
fasting and stress.
Carbohydrate, principally glucose, yields about four kilocalories per gram and is
the most readily used fuel, the obligatory fuel for some tissues such as the brain
and red cells under normal conditions.
It is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle,
but these stores are limited — enough for less than a day's fasting — the liver
glycogen serving to maintain blood glucose and the muscle glycogen serving the
muscle itself.
Fat, stored as triglyceride in adipose tissue, is by far the largest energy store,
yielding about nine kilocalories per gram — more than twice that of carbohydrate or
protein — and representing weeks of energy reserve;
it is the body's main long-term fuel depot.
Protein yields about four kilocalories per gram but is not primarily a storage
fuel; the body's protein is functional — enzymes, muscle,
structural proteins — so its use as fuel, in starvation or severe stress,
represents a breakdown of working tissue and is undesirable.
So the three fuels are carbohydrate,
the readily used but limited glycogen-stored fuel and obligate brain fuel; fat,
the energy-dense and abundant long-term store; and protein,
a functional tissue used as fuel only when necessary — a hierarchy that governs
metabolic adaptation.
Describe glycolysis.
Glycolysis is the initial pathway of glucose metabolism,
the sequence of reactions in the cytoplasm that breaks one molecule of glucose into
two molecules of pyruvate, and it is fundamental because it occurs in nearly all
cells, requires no oxygen for its own steps,
and feeds the later energy-yielding pathways.
The pathway takes the six-carbon glucose through a series of enzyme-catalysed
steps, first investing two molecules of ATP to phosphorylate and prime the sugar,
then splitting it and carrying the fragments through to two three-carbon molecules
of pyruvate.
In the process it generates a small net yield of energy directly:
two molecules of ATP net per glucose, by substrate-level phosphorylation,
and it reduces the carrier molecule to form two molecules of the reduced electron
carrier, which can later yield more ATP.
Glycolysis is regulated at key enzymatic steps,
the rate-limiting step being controlled by the cell's energy state,
so that it speeds up when energy is needed and slows when ATP is plentiful.
Its importance is several-fold: it provides rapid, oxygen-independent energy;
it is the only energy source for cells lacking mitochondria,
such as the mature red cell; and its product, pyruvate,
is the gateway to the much larger aerobic energy yield.
So glycolysis is the cytoplasmic, oxygen-independent splitting of glucose to two
pyruvate molecules, yielding a small net amount of ATP and reduced electron
carriers directly, regulated by the cell's energy needs,
and serving as the universal first step that feeds aerobic metabolism.
What happens to pyruvate, and what distinguishes aerobic from anaerobic metabolism?
The fate of pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis,
depends critically on the availability of oxygen,
and this fork in the pathway defines the distinction between aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism, with major consequences for energy yield and for the production of
lactate.
When oxygen is available — aerobic metabolism — pyruvate enters the mitochondrion
and is converted to acetyl coenzyme A,
which feeds the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation,
extracting the great bulk of the glucose molecule's energy.
When oxygen is lacking or demand outstrips supply — anaerobic metabolism — pyruvate
cannot be processed by the oxygen-dependent mitochondrial pathways,
so it is instead reduced to lactate in the cytoplasm.
This conversion of pyruvate to lactate serves a vital purpose:
it regenerates the oxidised electron carrier needed to keep glycolysis running,
allowing continued, if meagre, ATP production in the absence of oxygen.
The cost is twofold: very little ATP is obtained, and lactate,
with associated hydrogen ions, accumulates.
The lactate is not wasted; it can be carried in the blood to the liver and
reconverted to glucose by gluconeogenesis,
the glucose returning to the tissues — the Cori cycle.
Raised blood lactate is therefore a clinical marker of anaerobic metabolism and
inadequate tissue oxygen delivery, central to the assessment of shock.
So pyruvate is oxidised fully when oxygen is present but reduced to lactate when it
is not, regenerating the carrier for continued glycolysis at the cost of little
energy and accumulating lactate — a marker of tissue hypoxia and the substrate of
the Cori cycle.
Describe the Krebs cycle.
The Krebs cycle, also called the citric acid or tricarboxylic acid cycle,
is the central hub of aerobic metabolism,
a cyclical sequence of reactions in the mitochondrial matrix that completes the
oxidation of fuel-derived carbon and harvests its energy as reduced electron
carriers for the final energy-yielding step.
The cycle accepts the two-carbon acetyl group, carried as acetyl coenzyme A,
which is derived not only from carbohydrate via pyruvate but also from the
breakdown of fat and of some amino acids — so the cycle is the common final pathway
for all three fuels.
The acetyl group combines with a four-carbon molecule to form the six-carbon
citrate, which is then taken through a series of steps that progressively release
two molecules of carbon dioxide — the metabolic carbon dioxide we exhale — and
regenerate the original acceptor to continue the cycle.
The true purpose of the cycle is energy capture:
at several steps it reduces electron carriers,
producing the reduced carriers that carry high-energy electrons to the electron
transport chain, and it generates a small amount of high-energy phosphate directly.
The cycle turns twice per glucose molecule.
It is regulated by the energy state and by the supply of substrate and carriers.
So the Krebs cycle is the mitochondrial common final pathway that oxidises the
acetyl groups from all three fuels,
releasing carbon dioxide and capturing the energy as reduced electron carriers that
feed the electron transport chain — the central rotary hub of aerobic energy
metabolism.
Explain oxidative phosphorylation and the electron transport chain.
Oxidative phosphorylation is the process that generates the great majority of the
cell's ATP, occurring on the inner mitochondrial membrane,
where the energy of the electrons carried by the reduced carriers is used to
synthesise ATP, with oxygen as the final electron acceptor — which is why it is the
reason we breathe.
The reduced electron carriers produced by glycolysis,
the Krebs cycle and fat oxidation deliver their high-energy electrons to the
electron transport chain, a series of protein complexes embedded in the inner
mitochondrial membrane.
As the electrons pass down the chain through these complexes,
releasing energy at each step, that energy is used to pump hydrogen ions across the
inner membrane, from the matrix into the inter-membrane space,
creating an electrochemical gradient — a proton-motive force.
The hydrogen ions then flow back down this gradient through the enzyme ATP
synthase, and this flow drives the synthesis of ATP from adenosine diphosphate and
phosphate — the chemiosmotic mechanism.
At the end of the chain, the spent electrons are passed to molecular oxygen,
which combines with hydrogen to form water;
oxygen is thus the essential terminal electron acceptor,
and without it the whole chain backs up and stops.
This coupling of electron transport to ATP synthesis through a proton gradient
yields the bulk of cellular ATP.
So oxidative phosphorylation uses the electron transport chain to pump protons and
create a gradient whose discharge through ATP synthase makes ATP,
with oxygen as the final electron acceptor forming water — the oxygen-dependent
process that produces most of our energy and consumes the oxygen we breathe.
Compare the ATP yield of aerobic and anaerobic glucose metabolism.
The contrast between the ATP yield of aerobic and anaerobic glucose metabolism is
enormous, and it explains both why oxygen is so vital and why anaerobic metabolism
is only a short-term expedient.
In anaerobic metabolism, glucose is taken only as far as lactate,
and the sole energy obtained is the small net yield of glycolysis itself — two
molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose.
In aerobic metabolism, by contrast,
glucose is oxidised completely to carbon dioxide and water,
and the reduced electron carriers generated by glycolysis,
by the conversion of pyruvate, and by the Krebs cycle are all passed to oxidative
phosphorylation, which extracts the bulk of the energy;
the complete aerobic oxidation of one glucose molecule yields on the order of
thirty to thirty-two molecules of ATP,
the exact figure depending on the accounting and on the shuttle systems used.
Aerobic metabolism therefore yields roughly fifteen to sixteen times more ATP per
glucose than anaerobic metabolism.
This is why tissues with high, sustained energy demands depend absolutely on
oxygen, why oxygen delivery is so central to survival,
and why anaerobic metabolism, though it allows brief survival and bursts of
activity without oxygen, is grossly inefficient and unsustainable,
rapidly depleting glucose and accumulating lactate.
So aerobic metabolism yields around thirty to thirty-two ATP per glucose against
only two from anaerobic metabolism — a roughly fifteen-fold difference that
underlies the absolute dependence of high-demand tissues on oxygen and the
unsustainability of anaerobic energy production.
How is fat metabolised for energy?
Fat is the body's largest energy store and its principal fuel during fasting and
sustained low-intensity activity, and its metabolism for energy proceeds through
the mobilisation of stored triglyceride and the oxidation of the resulting fatty
acids, with ketone bodies formed when fat oxidation is high.
Stored triglyceride in adipose tissue is first broken down by lipolysis into
glycerol and free fatty acids, a process stimulated by the hormones of the fasting
and stress states — catecholamines, glucagon,
cortisol and growth hormone — and suppressed by insulin.
The liberated fatty acids are carried in the blood bound to albumin to the tissues,
where they enter the mitochondria and undergo beta-oxidation,
a cyclical process that progressively cleaves two-carbon units from the fatty acid
chain, each yielding acetyl coenzyme A, which enters the Krebs cycle,
together with reduced electron carriers that feed oxidative phosphorylation.
Because fatty acids are highly reduced and energy-dense,
their oxidation yields a great deal of ATP per molecule.
The glycerol can enter gluconeogenesis.
When the rate of fat oxidation is high and acetyl coenzyme A is produced faster
than the Krebs cycle can accept it — as in prolonged fasting,
starvation or uncontrolled diabetes — the liver converts the excess into ketone
bodies, which are released as an alternative,
water-soluble fuel that other tissues, including ultimately the brain, can use.
So fat is metabolised by lipolysis to fatty acids,
which undergo beta-oxidation to acetyl coenzyme A feeding the Krebs cycle and
yielding abundant ATP, with surplus converted by the liver to ketone bodies as an
alternative fuel in fasting and diabetes.
What about the metabolism of protein and amino acids?
Protein and its constituent amino acids occupy a special place in metabolism
because, unlike carbohydrate and fat,
they contain nitrogen and are primarily functional rather than storage molecules,
so their use as fuel has particular features and consequences.
Dietary protein is digested to amino acids,
which are absorbed and used first for their proper purposes:
the synthesis of the body's own proteins — enzymes,
structural and contractile proteins, plasma proteins,
hormones and so on — in a continuous turnover of synthesis and breakdown.
Amino acids surplus to synthetic needs, or mobilised when other fuels are scarce,
can be used for energy, but to do so the nitrogen-containing amino group must first
be removed, by deamination or transamination;
the carbon skeleton that remains can then enter the metabolic pathways,
either being converted to glucose by gluconeogenesis, the glucogenic amino acids,
or to acetyl coenzyme A and ketones, the ketogenic amino acids,
and so oxidised for energy.
The removed nitrogen is potentially toxic as ammonia and is converted by the liver
into urea, which is excreted by the kidney — the urea cycle — so protein catabolism
increases urea production and nitrogen excretion.
Because the body's protein is functional, drawing on it for fuel,
as in starvation and severe catabolic illness, depletes muscle and impairs function.
So amino acids are used chiefly for protein synthesis,
but when used for energy their nitrogen is removed and converted to urea while the
carbon skeleton is oxidised or converted to glucose — a process that,
by consuming functional protein, underlies the muscle wasting of starvation and
critical illness.
Describe gluconeogenesis and glycogen metabolism.
The maintenance of an adequate blood glucose concentration is vital,
especially for the brain, and it is achieved between meals and during fasting by
two hepatic processes — the breakdown of glycogen and the synthesis of new glucose
— which together defend the blood glucose.
Glycogen is the stored, branched polymer of glucose,
held chiefly in the liver and muscle.
In the fasting state, the liver breaks down its glycogen by glycogenolysis to
release glucose into the blood, the first and rapid line of defence of blood
glucose; this store, however, is limited and is substantially depleted within about
a day of fasting.
Muscle glycogen, lacking the enzyme to release free glucose,
serves only the muscle itself. Once glycogen is exhausted,
the body relies on gluconeogenesis,
the synthesis of new glucose from non-carbohydrate precursors,
occurring mainly in the liver and to some extent the kidney.
The substrates are lactate, returned from anaerobic tissues by the Cori cycle;
glycerol, from the breakdown of fat; and glucogenic amino acids,
from the breakdown of protein.
These processes are reciprocally regulated by hormones:
insulin promotes glycogen storage and suppresses glucose production in the fed
state, while glucagon, catecholamines and cortisol promote glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis in fasting and stress.
So blood glucose is defended first by hepatic glycogenolysis and then,
as glycogen is exhausted, by gluconeogenesis from lactate,
glycerol and amino acids, under reciprocal control by insulin on the one hand and
the counter-regulatory hormones on the other.
Describe the metabolic state in the fed condition.
The fed, or absorptive, state is the metabolic condition during and for a few hours
after a meal, characterised by an abundance of incoming fuel and dominated by the
hormone insulin, whose overriding theme is the storage of fuel for later use.
After a meal, the absorption of glucose,
amino acids and fats from the gut raises their concentrations in the blood,
and the rise in glucose stimulates the pancreas to secrete insulin.
Insulin is the hormone of fuel storage,
and it orchestrates the disposal of the incoming fuel.
It promotes the uptake of glucose into muscle and fat by recruiting glucose
transporters; it stimulates the storage of glucose as glycogen in liver and muscle;
it promotes the synthesis and storage of fat,
both from dietary fat and from surplus carbohydrate converted to fat in the liver;
and it promotes the uptake of amino acids and protein synthesis.
At the same time, insulin suppresses the opposite,
fuel-mobilising processes — it inhibits glycogen breakdown,
gluconeogenesis and lipolysis — so that while fuel is plentiful the body stores
rather than mobilises.
Glucose is the predominant fuel actually being oxidised for immediate energy in
this state. The net result is that ingested fuel is used for immediate needs and
the surplus is laid down as glycogen, fat and protein.
So the fed state is the insulin-dominated condition of fuel abundance in which
glucose is the main fuel oxidised and the surplus is stored as glycogen,
fat and protein, while the mobilising pathways are suppressed.
Now describe the metabolic adaptations to fasting and starvation.
Fasting and starvation provoke a series of coordinated metabolic adaptations whose
purpose is to maintain the blood glucose, particularly for the brain,
while progressively shifting the body to use its fat stores and to spare its
protein, and these adaptations unfold over time as the fast lengthens.
As soon as feeding stops and blood glucose begins to fall,
insulin secretion declines and the counter-regulatory hormones — glucagon,
and in stress the catecholamines and cortisol — predominate,
switching the body from storage to mobilisation.
In the early fast, of several hours,
blood glucose is maintained by hepatic glycogenolysis.
As glycogen is depleted over about a day, gluconeogenesis takes over,
the liver synthesising glucose from lactate, glycerol and amino acids;
at this stage protein begins to be broken down to supply gluconeogenic amino acids,
at the cost of functional tissue.
Meanwhile, lipolysis is activated and fatty acids become the main fuel for most
tissues, sparing glucose for the brain.
As starvation continues over days, a key adaptation supervenes:
the liver produces ketone bodies from the high rate of fat oxidation,
and the brain progressively adapts to use ketones as its major fuel,
greatly reducing its glucose requirement.
This ketotic adaptation spares protein,
slowing the otherwise fatal breakdown of muscle,
and is the crucial mechanism of prolonged survival.
So fasting moves through glycogenolysis,
then gluconeogenesis with some protein breakdown, to a fat-dominated,
ketotic state in which the brain uses ketones and protein is spared — a hormonally
orchestrated adaptation that defends glucose and prolongs survival.
How does the metabolic response to surgery and stress differ,
and why does it matter?
The metabolic response to surgery, trauma and critical illness is a hypermetabolic,
catabolic state that differs importantly from simple starvation,
and recognising the difference matters because it shapes nutrition,
glucose control and recovery.
Whereas simple starvation is characterised by a fall in metabolic rate and an
adaptive, protein-sparing shift to ketones,
the stress response is driven by the neuroendocrine reaction to injury — high
levels of cortisol, catecholamines, glucagon and growth hormone,
together with inflammatory cytokines — which produce a quite different pattern.
Metabolic rate and oxygen consumption rise, rather than fall.
There is marked catabolism: protein breakdown is accelerated and is not spared as
it is in starvation, causing loss of muscle and a negative nitrogen balance even
when the patient is fed.
There is stress hyperglycaemia: glucose production is increased by gluconeogenesis
and glycogenolysis, while insulin resistance impairs glucose uptake,
so blood glucose rises — a hallmark of the stress response,
relevant to perioperative glucose management.
Lipolysis is increased. The response is proportional to the magnitude of injury and
serves, in evolutionary terms, to mobilise fuel and substrate for the immune
response and healing, but in excess it causes harmful wasting and hyperglycaemia.
It is attenuated by good analgesia, particularly regional anaesthesia,
and by minimally invasive surgery, which is part of the rationale of enhanced
recovery.
So the stress response is a hypermetabolic, catabolic,
insulin-resistant state with hyperglycaemia and protein wasting that,
unlike starvation, is not protein-sparing,
and which we attenuate with analgesia and modern surgical care.
What is the basal metabolic rate, and what is the respiratory quotient?
The basal metabolic rate and the respiratory quotient are two fundamental measures
of metabolism, the first quantifying the rate of energy expenditure and the second
indicating which fuel is being burned,
and both are measurable and clinically informative.
The basal metabolic rate is the rate of energy expenditure of the body at complete
rest, in a fasted, thermally neutral state,
representing the energy needed merely to maintain the essential functions of life —
the work of the heart, the respiratory muscles, the kidneys,
the maintenance of ion gradients and body temperature.
It accounts for the majority of daily energy expenditure in a sedentary person.
It can be measured by calorimetry: direct calorimetry measures heat output,
while indirect calorimetry, more practical,
calculates energy expenditure from oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
production, since metabolism consumes oxygen and produces carbon dioxide in fixed
proportions.
The respiratory quotient is the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to oxygen
consumed, and its value reveals the fuel being oxidised:
pure carbohydrate oxidation gives a respiratory quotient of one,
because equal volumes of carbon dioxide and oxygen are exchanged;
pure fat oxidation gives about zero point seven,
because fat oxidation consumes relatively more oxygen; and protein is intermediate.
A typical mixed-diet value is around zero point eight.
So the basal metabolic rate is the resting energy expenditure maintaining essential
function, measured by calorimetry from oxygen consumption,
while the respiratory quotient — the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to oxygen
consumed — indicates the fuel mix, near one for carbohydrate and around zero point
seven for fat.
What factors affect the metabolic rate?
The metabolic rate is not fixed but varies with numerous physiological and
pathological factors, and the anaesthetist must appreciate these because they alter
oxygen demand, carbon dioxide production and heat generation,
all of which we manage.
Body size and composition are fundamental:
larger bodies have higher total metabolic rates,
and lean tissue is more metabolically active than fat,
so metabolic rate relates to lean body mass.
Age affects it, the rate per kilogram being highest in infancy and childhood and
declining with age. Sex has a modest effect, related to body composition.
The thyroid hormones are the major endocrine regulators of basal metabolic rate,
increasing it substantially in hyperthyroidism and lowering it in hypothyroidism;
catecholamines also raise it.
Body temperature has a powerful effect,
metabolic rate rising with fever — roughly ten to thirteen per cent per degree
Celsius — and falling with hypothermia,
the basis of the protective effect of cooling.
Physical activity is the most variable factor,
exercise raising metabolic rate many-fold above basal.
Feeding raises it transiently, the thermic effect of food.
Pregnancy, growth and healing raise it,
as does the stress response to illness and surgery.
Drugs and anaesthesia generally lower it.
So metabolic rate is determined by body size and lean mass, age,
thyroid and catecholamine status, body temperature, physical activity, feeding,
and physiological and pathological demands — factors that together set the body's
oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production and heat output.
Explain the relationship between oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption.
The relationship between oxygen delivery and oxygen consumption is central to the
whole of metabolism and to critical care,
because it determines whether the tissues can meet their energy needs aerobically,
and its breakdown is the essence of shock.
Oxygen delivery is the rate at which oxygen is carried to the tissues,
the product of the cardiac output and the arterial oxygen content — the latter
depending chiefly on the haemoglobin concentration and its saturation.
Oxygen consumption is the rate at which the tissues actually use oxygen for
metabolism, normally around a quarter of the oxygen delivered,
so that there is a substantial reserve and the blood returning to the heart is
still about seventy-five per cent saturated.
The key feature of the relationship is that, over a wide range,
oxygen consumption is independent of delivery: as delivery falls,
the tissues simply extract a greater fraction of the oxygen,
so consumption is maintained and metabolism continues normally — consumption is
said to be supply-independent.
However, if delivery falls below a critical threshold,
extraction can no longer compensate,
and consumption begins to fall with delivery — it becomes supply-dependent — at
which point tissues turn to anaerobic metabolism, lactate rises,
and dysoxia and organ dysfunction ensue.
This critical point defines inadequate oxygen delivery.
So oxygen consumption is normally independent of delivery because the tissues
adjust their extraction, but below a critical delivery threshold consumption
becomes supply-dependent, anaerobic metabolism supervenes and lactate rises — the
physiological definition of shock and the rationale for optimising oxygen delivery.
How are temperature and metabolism related, including uncoupling and thermogenesis?
Temperature and metabolism are intimately linked in two directions:
metabolism generates heat, and temperature in turn affects the rate of metabolism,
and there are specialised mechanisms for generating heat that are relevant to the
neonate and to certain pathological states.
All metabolism is somewhat inefficient,
and the energy not captured as ATP is released as heat;
this metabolic heat production is the body's principal source of warmth,
the basal metabolic processes of the core organs being the main generators at rest.
The rate of metabolic reactions is itself temperature-dependent,
increasing with temperature — a relationship sometimes expressed as a temperature
coefficient, with metabolic rate rising by roughly ten to thirteen per cent per
degree Celsius — so that fever increases and hypothermia decreases metabolic rate
and oxygen demand, the latter underlying the protective effect of therapeutic
hypothermia.
Heat can also be generated deliberately. Shivering thermogenesis produces heat by
the metabolic work of involuntary muscle contraction.
Non-shivering thermogenesis, important in the neonate who cannot shiver
effectively, occurs in brown adipose tissue,
which is rich in mitochondria containing an uncoupling protein:
this protein allows the proton gradient of the mitochondria to be discharged
without making ATP, so that the energy of substrate oxidation is released directly
as heat rather than captured — uncoupling oxidation from phosphorylation to
generate warmth.
So metabolism generates heat as an inevitable by-product and is itself
temperature-sensitive, while shivering and, in the neonate,
non-shivering thermogenesis through mitochondrial uncoupling in brown fat provide
mechanisms for deliberate heat production.
What vitamins and cofactors are essential to energy metabolism?
Energy metabolism depends not only on the fuels themselves but on a range of
vitamins and cofactors that act as essential helpers for the enzymes of the
metabolic pathways, and deficiencies of these can impair energy production with
clinical consequences relevant to anaesthesia and critical care.
Many of the water-soluble B-group vitamins are central,
because their derivatives serve as coenzymes in the energy pathways.
Thiamine, vitamin B-one, is a crucial example:
its active form is an essential cofactor for the enzyme that converts pyruvate to
acetyl coenzyme A and for an enzyme of the Krebs cycle,
so thiamine deficiency blocks the aerobic oxidation of carbohydrate,
causing lactate to accumulate and producing the syndromes of beriberi and
Wernicke's encephalopathy — important in the malnourished and the
alcohol-dependent, and a reason to give thiamine before glucose in such patients.
Riboflavin and niacin form the electron carriers that shuttle electrons to the
respiratory chain. Other B vitamins serve as cofactors in fat and amino-acid
metabolism.
Beyond vitamins, minerals act as cofactors — magnesium is required for the very
handling of ATP, which functions as a magnesium complex,
and iron and copper are essential to the electron transport chain.
So energy metabolism requires vitamin and mineral cofactors — notably the B
vitamins, with thiamine essential to aerobic carbohydrate metabolism,
the electron-carrier vitamins, and minerals such as magnesium and iron — and their
deficiency, as with thiamine in the malnourished,
can critically impair energy production.
Which metabolic emergencies and disorders of particular anaesthetic importance
arise from these pathways?
Several dangerous metabolic emergencies and disorders arise directly from
derangements of energy metabolism, and they are of particular anaesthetic
importance because we may precipitate, encounter or have to treat them.
Malignant hyperthermia is the foremost:
a pharmacogenetic disorder in which volatile anaesthetics and suxamethonium trigger
uncontrolled release of calcium in skeletal muscle, driving a massive,
uncontrolled hypermetabolic state — runaway ATP consumption and aerobic and
anaerobic metabolism — producing a steep rise in carbon dioxide production,
oxygen consumption, heat and lactate, with rigidity, hyperthermia and acidosis;
it is treated by removing the trigger,
supportive cooling and the specific agent dantrolene.
The propofol infusion syndrome is a rare but lethal disorder of mitochondrial
fatty-acid metabolism, seen with prolonged high-dose propofol,
in which impaired fat oxidation causes metabolic acidosis, lactataemia,
cardiac failure and rhabdomyolysis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is the metabolic emergency of insulin deficiency,
in which unrestrained lipolysis and ketogenesis produce a severe metabolic acidosis
with hyperglycaemia and dehydration, requiring insulin,
fluid and electrolyte correction.
Lactic acidosis from inadequate tissue oxygenation in shock is a marker and
consequence of the failure of aerobic metabolism.
Inborn errors of metabolism, mitochondrial diseases,
and the refeeding syndrome — in which reintroducing carbohydrate to the starved
causes dangerous shifts of phosphate and electrolytes — are further examples.
So the metabolic emergencies of anaesthetic importance include malignant
hyperthermia, the propofol infusion syndrome, diabetic ketoacidosis,
lactic acidosis and the refeeding syndrome,
all arising from the energy pathways we have discussed and all demanding prompt
recognition and treatment.
Comment briefly on nutritional support in the perioperative and critically ill
patient.
Nutritional support is the practical application of metabolic physiology to the
surgical and critically ill patient,
aiming to provide fuel and substrate to limit the catabolic loss of the stress
response and support recovery, while avoiding the hazards of overfeeding and
refeeding.
The catabolic, hypermetabolic stress response causes loss of muscle and a negative
nitrogen balance that impairs healing, immunity and respiratory muscle function,
so adequate nutrition matters to outcome,
particularly in prolonged critical illness and in the already malnourished.
Support may be given enterally, into the functioning gut,
which is preferred because it is more physiological,
maintains the gut mucosa and barrier, and carries fewer complications,
or parenterally, intravenously, when the gut cannot be used.
The goals are to provide sufficient but not excessive energy — overfeeding causes
hyperglycaemia, excess carbon dioxide production that burdens ventilation,
and hepatic and metabolic complications — and adequate protein to limit catabolism,
along with the necessary electrolytes, vitamins and trace elements.
The timing and intensity of feeding in critical illness are debated,
with evidence cautioning against aggressive early overfeeding.
A specific hazard is the refeeding syndrome:
reintroducing carbohydrate to a severely malnourished patient triggers an insulin
surge that drives phosphate, potassium and magnesium into cells,
causing dangerous deficiencies and requiring cautious feeding with electrolyte
monitoring and thiamine.
So nutritional support, preferably enteral, provides measured energy,
protein and micronutrients to limit catabolism and support recovery,
avoiding overfeeding and the refeeding syndrome — metabolic physiology applied at
the bedside.
Finally, draw together the anaesthetic relevance of energy metabolism and
biochemistry.
Drawing the station together, energy metabolism is the biochemical foundation
beneath a great deal of anaesthetic and critical-care practice,
and although its pathways are detailed,
a few unifying themes connect them to what we do.
Everything turns on the regeneration of ATP, the universal energy currency,
from the oxidation of carbohydrate, fat and protein,
and on the central role of oxygen as the final electron acceptor that makes the
efficient aerobic production of ATP possible.
From this follow our preoccupations.
Oxygen delivery and consumption define whether tissues can metabolise aerobically;
their relationship, and the critical threshold below which consumption becomes
supply-dependent and lactate rises,
is the physiology of shock and the rationale for optimising oxygen delivery,
with lactate as our marker of anaerobic metabolism.
The handling of glucose — its storage in the fed state and its defence by
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis in fasting — and the hormonal switch between
storage and mobilisation underlie perioperative glucose management and the stress
hyperglycaemia of surgery.
The catabolic, hypermetabolic stress response,
distinct from protein-sparing starvation, shapes nutrition and recovery.
Metabolic rate determines oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production and heat,
all of which we monitor and manage,
and temperature and metabolism are reciprocally linked.
And the metabolic emergencies — malignant hyperthermia,
the propofol infusion syndrome, ketoacidosis and the refeeding syndrome — are
derangements of these very pathways.
So energy metabolism unifies oxygen delivery, glucose control, the stress response,
temperature, nutrition and the metabolic emergencies — the biochemistry that
underlies the physiology we manage every day.
Thank you. A comprehensive and accomplished account,
and a fitting close to this set of stations. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Everything turns on regenerating ATP, the universal energy currency,
from the oxidation of carbohydrate,
fat and protein - with oxygen as the final electron acceptor that makes efficient
aerobic ATP production (about 30-32 ATP per glucose) possible,
versus only 2 from anaerobic glycolysis.
Second, Oxygen consumption is normally independent of delivery because tissues
adjust extraction, but below a critical delivery threshold it becomes
supply-dependent, anaerobic metabolism supervenes and lactate rises - the
physiology of shock and the rationale for optimising oxygen delivery.
3.
Blood glucose is defended in fasting first by hepatic glycogenolysis then by
gluconeogenesis (from lactate, glycerol and amino acids),
with prolonged starvation shifting to a fat-dominated, ketotic,
protein-sparing state; insulin (storage) versus the counter-regulatory hormones
(mobilisation) switch between fed and fasted metabolism.
Third, The surgical stress response is hypermetabolic,
catabolic and insulin-resistant with hyperglycaemia and protein wasting - unlike
protein-sparing starvation - and is attenuated by good analgesia,
regional techniques and minimally invasive surgery.
Fourth, The metabolic emergencies arise from these pathways:
malignant hyperthermia (runaway hypermetabolism, treated with dantrolene),
propofol infusion syndrome (impaired fat oxidation), diabetic ketoacidosis,
lactic acidosis and the refeeding syndrome - all demanding prompt recognition;
give thiamine before glucose in the malnourished.
Thank you. That concludes the station.